So before we get started, I want to show
you why this video is worth your time
and why it's important to be talking
about open code right now. Because tools
come and go, but momentum and ecosystem
usually tells you what's going to stick.
I've collected these three different
screenshots here that really show
something interesting. It really shows
why Open Code is worth your time right
now. So when we look at Cloud Code on
GitHub, it has around 67,000 stars. But
when we look at Open Code, it has
105,000 stars. In this month alone, it's
gotten 36,517
stars on GitHub. Anyways, Open Code is
more popular than Claude Code. So, I
think it's safe to say that Open Code is
not just new and shiny. It's already
ahead in the community adoption signals.
But this screenshot here really shows
the velocity that's happening. So, it
shows that people are switching. People
are making content, building plugins,
and the workflow is spreading. So, why
does this matter? When a tool is moving
this fast, you usually get better
documentation, more tutorials, more
community configurations, and more I hit
this bug and here's the fix post that
makes your learning curve shorter. All
right, now that this isn't a random
weekend project, let's talk about how
open code actually works so the setup
makes sense. Let's start first by
thinking about what open code really is.
So, Open Code is really the open- source
version of cloud code. So it can do
almost everything that cloud code can
do. Plus it's has an MIT license and is
100% open source and on top of that it's
provider agnostic. You can use it with
cloud, you can use it with open AI, you
can use it with Google and you can even
use it with local models. This is what I
think. If you want flexibility and an
[music] open tool that you can shape,
open code is probably the better choice.
But if you want to go the official
anthropic path and you're already
standardized, then cloud code may be the
better choice for you. The most valuable
point on open code is really this that
it's provider agnostic. Because when you
think about what just happened, for
instance, Enthropic came out with their
new AI model and then so did OpenAI.
Enthropic said that this was their most
powerful coding model and then OpenAI
came out with one that was actually
better for coding, right, the 5.3
codeex. And so it's nice to be able to
try them both. To me, this is a really
important point that it's provider
agnostic, so you can switch around from
different ones. In this video, what I'm
going to be showing you guys is how to
set up Open Code on Windows. We're going
to install Open Code in a Windows
friendly way with WSL. We're going to
connect models and providers and
understand where the credentials live.
and I'm going to show you guys how you
can use build mode and plan mode
effectively and when to switch between
them. We're also going to set up some
project rules with agents.md and a quick
refresher on this as well. And then
we'll create we'll create some skills
and commands that will work globally or
per repo. Why are we going to install it
on WSL? Really? Because that's what Open
Code recommends for the best performance
and terminal compatibility. So, I'm not
going to walk you guys through how to
install WSL, but this is the command
that you'll want to use. Just go to your
terminal, type in WSL-install,
and then it will work for you. And then
we're going to pick it up from right
here. We're going to use this command to
install Open Code, and then we'll go
from there. How should we think about
Open Code? Well, open code is easiest to
think of as three layers. First, we have
the agents layer. Who's doing the work?
Who's [music] driving right now? You'll
mainly use the build mode and then the
plan mode. The build mode is the do work
mode and the plan mode is think safely.
If you're new to a codebase, plan keeps
you from letting an agent bulldoze the
repo and just run off the rails. Now,
the second layer is rules. How should
the agents behave in this repo? That's
the agents MD that tells the model your
project conventions, structure, and
do/dones
[music] rules. Think of this as like
your onboarding notes for a new
teammate, how to run tests, the folder
structure, formatting rules, what not to
touch, how pull requests and commits
work. Without this, you'll end up
repeating yourself every prompt. Now,
the third layer is the extensions.
[music] How we automate repeatable work.
Skills are the reusable playbooks that
the agents can load. And then the
commands are like oneshot buttons that
you can run with a slashname. Whenever
you're first getting started with open
code, you don't want to overbuild a
giant skills library on day one. You
just want to focus on two to three real
tasks first and then codify what you end
up repeating. It's really good to just
start with a well-rounded agents MD and
using the agents effectively the build
agent and the plan agent. This is the
setup that we're going to have. We're
going to use cursor for editing, open
code for agent runs in a WSL
environment. And now the goal is cursor
is the editor, WSL is the runtime. Open
code runs in WSL and edits the same
files that cursor has open. So the
biggest win here is really consistency.
One copy of the repo, one set of
credentials, and one tool chain. The
workflow is going to be like this. We're
going to open up the repo in cursor
using the WSL file system integration.
Open a WSL terminal in that same repo
folder and then run open code from
there. Now, a good rule of thumb is if
your IDE shows that WSL in the bottom
left, then you got your setup properly
working. Let's hop over to our file
system and open up cursor and I'll show
you guys how to set this up. I'm going
to assume that you have WSL installed at
the very least. Now, whenever we open up
a terminal, we're going to go to the top
here and this little arrow that's
pointing down, we'll click that and we
can switch to WSL just by hitting this,
the Ubuntu. And now we're in our WSL.
What we're going to do is we're going to
make a new folder for our project. Let's
see where we're at right now. We'll go
inside of coding projects. We're inside
of the coding projects. We're going to
make a new directory and we're going to
call it open code demo. We'll go ahead
and change into that directory. Open
code demo. And now we'll just go ahead
and run a cursor dot. We're going to
open cursor up inside of this directory.
And here at the bottom, you can see it's
opening up the remote. with setting it
up. Now, we have that going and there's
nothing inside of here yet. Now, we need
to install Open Code. And it really
doesn't matter in which order you do
this. Like, we didn't have to open up
the directory before installing Open
Code. I'm just getting it set up. So,
you could do this before, but on the
Open Code.AI docs, it gives us this
command to run. We're going to run that
now. It's finished installing. We're
going to go ahead and run Open Code in
this directory. Looks like we may need
to reset our terminal. I'm just going to
copy this and we're going to open a new
one. You have two options here. You
could run the terminal user interface
here with a separate window, which is
the way that I like to do it, or inside
a cursor. I'll show you why I like to
have it in a separate window. If we hit
controlB, it conflicts with cursor. It's
a little bit harder to use there. That's
why I have a separate window open for
it. Now that we're inside of Open Code,
what's really nice is that they
automatically include free models
without us doing anything. You can see
we're running on this model here, the
Big Pickle from Open Code Zen. And we
can ask anything, we just say hello to
make sure it's working. Even just for a
simple hello though, it took 16 seconds
just to get back hello, how can I help
you? Even though Open Code does include
free models, it takes a little while.
They're not the best. When we hit
control P, we can see all the different
commands that are already built into
Open Code. And they're broken down by
category. The suggested category for
switching sessions, switching models.
And they have a few here for free as
well, the Miniax, the Kimmy, and the
GLM5, and the Big Pickle. And we can
also connect popular providers here. I
have the Chat GPT plus plan. We're going
to go ahead and select that. and we're
going to connect it with browser. And
I'm just going to log in here. We have
authorized successfully. We can go ahead
and close this. And now we can choose
which model that we want to use. I'm
going to use the GPT 5.3 codeex because
that's their most advanced model right
now. But if we wanted to switch models,
then we would just come back here and we
can choose which model we would like to
use. The next thing here is whenever
we're switching between modes, we're
[music] going to use the tab button. We
can see when we hit tab, it changes down
here from build to plan and back and
forth. Really using open code
effectively or cloud code or any sort of
AI assisted programming application. It
really comes down to using both the
build mode and the plan mode
effectively. I'm going to break down
when to use which for you. The build
mode is just do the work mode. The agent
gets full tool access, edits, bash for
implementation. You want to use this
when you're ready for code changes, and
that's best for adding features,
refactoring, fixing tests. A tip as well
is keep your prompts specific. Make
change X, run test Y, show diff. Now,
the plan mode, that's the think safely
mode, is restricted by permissions to
prevent unintended changes. It defaults
any risky actions to ask. But it's going
to ask you before it does anything,
before it runs any sort of risky
commands. And that's best for designing
code reviewing, debugging strategy,
really just making a solid plan. The
practical workflow here is you want to
start in plan mode. You always want to
start in plan mode [music] and then
confirm your approach. Get that super
solid. Make that bulletproof. And once
that's bulletproof, then switch to build
mode. And then you'll implement it. And
then you'll switch back to plan mode for
review. Now the next step for us is to
initialize open code in our repo in our
directory in our folder. And what this
is going to do whenever we run this
command here the init that's going to
generate an agents.md
in our repo root. [music] And now what
is that agents MD? It's going to be
custom instructions for the repo. It's
going to explain the structure, the
conventions, the dos, don'ts. The main
point is that it helps Open Code
navigate your codebase faster and safer.
That's what it's all about. And here's
an example of a simple agent MD
template. It has the setup commands on
how to set up the repo and it has some
code style instructions. A tip whenever
you're doing this is you'll want to
commit your agents MD so that your whole
team gets consistent agent behavior. The
goal is just enough structure that the
agent behaves like a teammate who read
the readme. Now we'll run that command.
We'll hit init. And that's also what's
really nice about open code is whenever
you hit the slash, you can see all the
different commands that currently exist.
It's currently inspecting the repo. It's
making an execution plan and going with
it from there. This time it looks like
it even asked me a question. Is this the
correct repository path or should I
analyze a different directory? Let me
see. Let's make sure that yep, that's
the right one. Say, yep. And on Windows,
if you wanted to type with your voice,
you would just hit Windows H. And now it
will start recording my voice. That's
how you can implement that. If you
wanted to vibe code with your voice is
just the Windows key and H. That's the
shortcut. Ah, so I see. So you see the
importance of making sure that you're in
the correct mode whenever you start
coding. It's currently in plan mode, so
that's why it keeps asking me questions
and asking me to do more things. So,
we're going to hit Ctrl P and we'll make
a new session. And this time, we'll
switch out of plan mode and we'll run
[music] a netit. Now, the agents.m MD
file is created. And I thought this last
message is really important. So, I want
to point that out to you. It says the
repository route is currently empty. So,
the commands are in intentionally a
bootstrap matrix until real project
scripts/configs are added. So, that
really comes back to the whole point.
Agents.m MD is not a write it once and
forget it. Agents MD is this file that's
living. It's going to change as your
repository changes. You can see
currently all the things that it's done.
It even has instructions here for if
cursor or copilot rules appear [music]
later. It has build and lint commands.
It has everything with the JavaScript,
Python, Go, Rust. So, it's really
complete. Not all this is going to be
super important for your individual
repo. This is a living document. you
want to change it as your project
changes. And if you wanted to dig deeper
into the agents.md format and its
purpose, you can go to agents.mmd on
online and you can see some more
additional information and some good
examples of some agents.mds. And you can
see here how they recommend using it.
Add the file, cover what matters, add
extra instructions, and you can even use
these nested agents.md files for sub
projects. At this point, we're pretty
ready to start making some cool
projects. We're ready to start using it.
I'm going to ask it to just generate a
basic flask application. I'm going to
say make a basic flask website for my
plumbing company. This is our color
scheme. And I found this color scheme
off of colorhunt.co.
And I really like this website because
it's color palettes that have been
curated by professional designers and
it's their favorite ones and you can
even see how many likes each one gets.
So, it's a cool resource to check out.
It's completed the application and it's
given me these commands to run it
locally. We'll go ahead and run those.
Let's go ahead and open that up. Now,
you can see here how well it's used our
color scheme. And yeah, it looks really
nice. And I'll show you something else,
too. If we make this full screen, you
can see that on this right side under
context, it shows us the number of
tokens that we used, how much of the
context window that we're taking up, and
also the number of dollars spent. We can
track all that here. And then we can
also track LSPs. This will activate as
files are read. And this is what an LSP
is. It's a language server protocol.
It's an open JSON RPC based standard
that allows code editors to communicate
with language specific intelligence
tools. That's quite a mouthful. So let
me break that down for you. I came
across this diagram and I think it
explains it really well. When we have
our development tool here, it goes back
and forth with the language server. You
think about you open a document that's
going to send a notification over to the
language server. If you edit a document,
it's going to send a notification over
to the language server. And now the
language server is going to analyze the
changes and look for any sorts of
problems and then [music] send it back.
The main point of an LSP is this. It
lets any editor get smart code features.
You think about autocomplete, go-to
definition, references, hover docs,
linting, rename, refactors without the
editor needing language specific logic.
The LSP is really going to assist the
agent in writing code. Now, as we build
this site out, you think there's going
to be a lot of repeat prompts. For
instance, if we're going to add a new
page, there's going to be a particular
way that we may want to have that page
structured. There's going to be, as we
use open code, there's going to be
prompts that we would like to save. And
that brings us to our next topic, skills
and commands. You can think of skills
this way as a reusable playbook. They're
not commands you run. They're knowledge
modules that the agent can load when it
hits a specific kind of task. So
example, this will be a skill for how we
write migrations or how do we make a new
endpoint, how do we make a new page and
how do we write tests [music] in this
repo. The benefit is consistently this.
instead of reexplaining your team
standards every time you encode them
once. Now, as you get more comfortable
with using open code and as your repo
grows, you're naturally going to build
skills. There's no point in putting a
whole lot of effort from day one [music]
and coming up with all these different
skills. But once you notice yourself
repeating yourself, that's a signal that
you may want to capture that as a skill.
And there's a particular structure as
well for where to put skills. If you
want it to be per project, you'll put it
inside of a folder, you'll call it open
code. And then you'll make another
folder inside of that and so forth. And
then if you want it to be a global
skill, you can put it inside of your
config. And you can also even add
permissions for it. So the discovery
behavior works like this as well. Open
code walks up to the git worksheet and
loads any matching skills. And global
skills are always available in every
repo. And here we see an example of one
of a front the required front matter. It
needs a name and it needs a description
and then from there you can continue
with it however you'd like. And now
commands are very similar but you can
think of these as workflow shortcuts.
Commands are more like buttons you
press, not so much as playbooks. A
command is something that you explicitly
run like maybe slash test or slash
review or slash ship. And you're going
to run these in the open code terminal
user interface. Commands are really
great when you want repeatability. They
reduce the amount of typing and the
number of prompt mistakes. And here as
well there's a particular place that you
want to put them as well per project and
globally. And here's an example of one
for a slash test. You give it a
description the which agent you want and
a model. And [music] then you can put in
whatever sort of prompt that you like.
So run the full test suite with
coverage, focus on failing tests and
suggest [music] edits. You can also add
arguments and placeholders by using a
dollar sign arguments. And you can even
which you can see here actually
/component button create a React
component named button. That's where
that would come in. And then for more
than one argument, you would just use a
dollar sign and then a number. You'd
give it a description and then write
your prompt. And then you would put the
dollar sign and then the number of
arguments. Now you would create a file
named config.json
in source with the contents of key
value. And again just to reiterate,
commands are like repeatable prompts.
It's do this. Now skills are how we do
this here. Commands are prompts. Skills
are those knowledge playbooks. And if
you wanted to go deeper on any of these
topics, you can just find them in the
open code.ai docs. So you can see for
instance for the it breaks down the
required front matter for a skill to
work and [music] the places to put the
files etc. And along with the commands
as well gives you a little bit more meat
as if you want to go deeper in these.
Let's go ahead and try to make our own
command and skill. Now I've actually put
together a skill already. We'll go ahead
and we're going to copy this folder with
this built-in skill and we're going to
put it in our config for open code.
We're going to put it right there. I'll
show you what that looks like as well.
This command helps scaffold a new open
code skill or command. And the usage
works like this. /caffold
skill name or scaffold command [music]
name. You are scaffolding a new open
code resource. The type is one [music]
and the name is two. If you look at it
like this, you're going to run /
scaffold either skill and the name is
whatever you put there. And then it's
going to follow these instructions for
each one to help us create either a
skill or a command. And we also have
global skill and global command. We have
that loaded in our global. We'll go
ahead and try it out. After you add a
new command, you're going to need to
restart your open code. We'll hit C and
we'll open it up again. If we go ahead
and use our command and we'll run
scaffold and we'll make this a new
command and we're going to call this one
a website or let's say web page.
Actually, this will be a command that we
run that will go ahead and make a new
web page inside of our app. Now, if we
look inside our directory, it's put
together a web page command for us.
Create a web page from a [music] prompt
with clear structure and styling. So,
it's even bootstrapped our command for
us. Let's go ahead and hit Ctrl + C to
get out of it and we'll reopen [music]
it. If we do a web page, then it runs
that prompt for us. Another thing too is
you can see we're on GPT 5.3 codeex, but
if we wanted to change our level of
thinking, we can hit control T and now
we're adjusting the level of thinking on
that, but we'll keep it regular for now.
It's completed a a web page here,
index.html, and it's included everything
that it needs. Now, when we look at our
context, you can see we're already at
17,000 tokens. That's not too bad. It's
only 4% used, but I'll show you a
command as that starts to get higher.
You can just run slash compact, and
that's going to compact the session.
That's going to summarize the session.
Now, we went from 4% used to 2% used and
9,000 tokens. Let's go ahead and
scaffold a new skill. We'll call this
skill and we'll say that this is a
copywriting skill. And we can see now
that it's bootstrapped for us a
copywriting skill. What I want to do
though is I'm a really big fan of high
focus language. So high focus language
is whenever you speak to the [music]
person directly and you show them the
value very clearly. Everyone has their
own definitions on what high focus means
to them. I have some instructions here
and I'm going to go ahead and reference
those instructions. We can see that it
completed it successfully and included
this in its references and it's added
the document to the copywriting skill.
So, we can go ahead and delete this one.
Let's go ahead and modify the copy on
this page. Currently, we see it says
plumbing done right the first time. From
emergency leaks to full fixture
installs, our experienced team keeps
your water flowing and your home
protected. Let's go ahead and use our
skill. Whenever we run the slash skills
command, you can see because it was just
added, it's not loaded. We just need to
go ahead and do control C open code. And
now if we let's switch sessions.
Actually, this is the one here. And
we'll go ahead and we'll run skills. And
we'll say this is the skill we want to
run. And I'll say adjust the copy on the
homepage. Looking at the copy now after
it's made the changes, it says that it's
updated the copy to be more benefitled
and high focus aligned. And it gives us
a summary of the changes that it's made.
You can see the clear user value and
next steps is a little bit more solid.
That should give you a really solid
introduction to open code. Just to
recap, this is the workflow that you'll
do every time that you open up a new
codebase. You'll put the repo in one
environment, preferably the WSL
environment. Then you'll open up open
code in that same environment. You'll
connect your model provider there. Use
whichever one you want. Then you'll do
your slashinit to generate your
agents.md. Then as you develop, you'll
come up with different commands that you
think you want to add either for your
global projects or for that individual
repo. And then you'll also add skills
remembering the difference. [music]
Commands are like buttons, repeatable
prompts, and skills are more like
playbooks for the agent to follow. If
you wanted to go deeper on any of these
topics, there's this really awesome
article that I read about how coding
agents actually work and inside of Open
Code. Even this architecture breakdown
is really nice. It gives you a really
deep dive into how everything is
working. If you want to check this out,
what you can do is click the link in the
description, join our school community,
and there'll be a post that has this
video on it, and I'm going to link this
article as well. If you want to check
that out, that'll be there. That'll be
it for this video. Thank you so much for
sticking to the end. If you enjoyed this
video, give it a like. Subscribe for
more content like this. If you'd like to
check out some of my other tech demos,
you can check that out right over here.
